un Security Council has failed to pass a
draft resolution calling for a
humanitarian Pauls in Gaza Brazil had
sponsored that draft the killing of
nearly 500 people in an Israeli air
strike on Tuesday is also high on the
agenda Brazil's president Luis anaso
Luda Silva called the attack an
unjustifiable tragedy let's go over to
Kristen salumi joins us now from the UN
headquarters in New York so Kristen what
happened the expectations were that this
text had been waled down and waled down
it would
pass yeah the security Council had been
negotiating on this draft for since
Friday uh when Brazil first started
working on it uh it got 12 votes but the
United States vetoed it uh the only vote
against it came from the United States
there were two extensions Russia and the
United Kingdom uh but again again 12
votes in favor it would have passed had
the United States not wielded its veto
and uh the United States is just about
to speak and give its
explanation but we've heard from Brazil
which holds the presidency of the
council saying that this uh lack of
action by the security Council in their
words does nothing for the International
Community uh they said that they had
worked to try to come up with a
compromise to all right sorry Christ now
I've got to jump and interrupt you we've
got the US ambassador to the United
Nations speaking let's listen into what
she's
saying is disappointed this resolution
made no mention of Israel's rights of
self-defense like every nation in the
world Israel has the inherent right of
self-defense as reflected in article 51
of the UN Charter following previous
terrorist attacks by groups such as
Al-Qaeda and Isis this Council
reaffirmed that right this text should
have done the same though we could not
support this resolution going forward we
will continue to work closely with all
council members on this pressing issue
just as we will continue to reiterate
the need to protect civilians including
members of the media humanitarian
workers and un officials and when I talk
about the protection of C civilians I
mean all civilians the United States is
horrified and saddened by yesterday's
explosion at the Ali Arab Hospital in
Gaza we mourn this tragic tragic loss of
life on the humanitarian front we are
working with Israel its neighbors the
United Nations and other partners to
address the humanitarian crisis in Gaza
it is critical that food medicine water
and fuel be began flowing into Gaza as
soon as
possible families the elderly and
children are in dire need let's be clear
hamas's own actions have brought this on
this severe humanitarian crisis in Gaza
and Hamas has caused so much needless
suffering death and
destruction every member State Should
condemn hamas's terrorism and cruelty
and every member State should call on
Hamas to cease its inless barrage of
rockets against Israel this is not
complicated it's not controversial this
is the bare
minimum colleagues at this difficult
moment let us all call for the
protection of civilians and
unequivocally condemn Hamas let us all
affirm Israel's right of self-defense
and support the Urgent diplomatic
efforts underway let us stand with the
UN and other partners as they work to
alleviate the humanitarian crisis facing
Palestinians in Gaza and let us all
support equal measures of justice and
freedom for Israelis and Palestinians
alike thank you Mr
President I thank the representative of
the United States and I give the floor
to the representative of Malta
thank you
president Malta voted in favor of the
draft resolution tabled by Brazil Malta
has also abstained on the two amendments
proposed by the Russian
Federation although we have no issue
with the substance we saw no reason to
alter a well-crafted resolution that
rests on a delicate balance and that
sought Council Unity on this critical
matter we deeply regret that that the
I'm sorry I
am yes I'm sorry we deeply regret that
the draft resolution was not adopted and
remain Gravely concerned at the highly
volatized are hearing right now from
Security Council Members Malta speaking
about their perspective that there was
no need to torpedo the Brazilian draft
resolution we heard before that from the
US ambassador to the UN condemning Hamas
but calling for a
humanitarian solution to the situation
in Gaza let's go live to Kristen salumi
joins us once again live from those un
headquarters in New York so sorry
Kristen I had to jump in and interrupt
you but you were explaining to us what
went wrong basically there was
expectations that this was going to pass
in at least some form to begin some
action to address the humanitarian need
in this
conflict
yeah so we just heard from the US
ambassador to the United Nations Linda
Thomas Greenfield uh she said that the
US vetoed this resolution because it had
no mention of Israel's right to
self-defense now on earlier versions of
this the US objected uh to the fact that
it didn't uh to to earlier uh versions
of this resolution and to a resolution
that was put forward by Russia uh the
United States said any resolution would
have to condemn Hamas and call for the
freeing of hostages and that was added
to this um the US subjected to a
humanitarian ceasefire a blanket
humanitarian ceasefire so this
resolution went from calling for a
humanitarian ceasefire to calling for
humanitarian pauses we heard from the
Brazilian uh ambassador to the UN that
did the negotiating and the drafting of
this resolution that multiple attempts
were made to uh work with member states
work with members of the security
Council to get an appropriate draft that
would pass uh we just heard from Malta
saying that they didn't vote in favor of
Russia's amendments even though they
didn't strongly object to them in an
effort to have a consensus and something
that would pass uh with the United
States the implication being there uh
and yet it didn't pass uh so we are
hearing from members of the security
Council about their concern for the
humanitarian situation on the ground in
Gaza uh and decrying the fact that the
International Community represented by
the security Council was unable to come
together and make a statement given the
gravity of the situation and the rapidly
deteriorating situation of the people in
Gaza now I should say that the United
States also said that they were
horrified by the explosion at the
hospital uh that left hundreds of
Palestinians Dead uh they said that they
were against the needless suffering of
the people of Gaza the innocent
civilians in Gaza but they put the blame
squarely on Hamas and uh called for
condemnation again of Hamas uh going
forward uh we are now hearing from many
members of the council who are
expressing their disappointment in the
fact uh China next China also voted in
favor uh of this resolution so I clearly
a big anticlimax here after several days
of intense negotiations to try to come
up with something which the UN said was
needed in order to get these supplies
into Gaza uh and alas no no resolution
no resolution but Christen then what
happens now now to all of this
diplomatic
momentum yeah it's a great question we
know that the United Nations has Aid
positioned uh in Israel in the West Bank
in Egypt they have been saying that they
need the bombs to stop in order to get
that Aid in there's no uh Safe Way for
humanitarians to do their work if the
bombs are falling the Secretary General
himself has called for an immediate
ceasefire uh he had hesitated to use
those words ceasefire he had been
calling for Access and so for so forth
after the hospital bombing he said it
very plainly we need a an immediate
ceasefire in order to get Aid in and to
get Israeli hostages out uh so the
pressure is still there the concern is
still there uh but now the pressure
turns to Israel and the United States to
find another way to allow this Aid in
since they are the United States are
responsible for blocking this
resolution all right we'll leave it
there thanks so much uh for that update
Kristen salumi watching the
situation in the UN Security Council
Let's uh bring in some pictures coming
in from Gaza as you can see there quite
an eerie sight another huge plume of
smoke over
Gaza as Sun uh as it heads towards
Sunset
there a very disturbing image of
continuing strikes and
suffering Sultan Barakat is director of
the global Institute for strategic
research at the hammed bin Khalifa
University here in qar so distilling
what we just saw there there it it does
look like there is AB absolutely no
progress in trying to establish a date a
mechanism un backing for any kind of
call it a seize fire call it a
humanitarian pause for any kind of break
in this fighting yes it's uh very
disappointing it's clear that the US is
looking to buy more time to allow ask to
allow the Israelis to carry out their
objective because you don't uh veto a
resolution based on a right that's
already PR implicit you know to say that
there is no reference for Israel to have
the right to defend itself this is
ridiculous every state has the right to
defend itself so that is already
implicit and this is the rule the rules
that the Nations work on so clearly this
has been taken as an excuse and I I fear
that it's going to have a greater impact
Way Beyond Israel and Palestine this is
going to be the last stro or even the
last nail in the coffin of the modern uh
sort of um order order that was created
in after the second world war led by the
United States already there's a lot of
anger in the South countries like Brazil
South Africa India Indonesia who do not
agree with the way the Security Council
is constructed and has been operating
and I think this particular incident
will go down in history now as the one
that really erupted all their anger
Sultan I I want to read to you a line
that we're getting here this is coming
in through Israeli media and I want to
see
your thoughts on whether this is tied to
the delay as uh as you put it the US
desire to to delay this resolution
Israeli media channel 12 quoting is the
Israeli Prime Minister's office is
saying that the Council of ministers is
decided that Israel will not allow any
humanitarian Aid to enter the Gaza Strip
unless the kidnapped Israelis are
returned is there a is this is there a
link here to why we've seen the US of
course there is now they've seen Biden
of the plane and they've gone back to
where we started a week ago and what we
fear is that now Hamas will retaliate
Hamas a week ago also threatened to uh
kill the kidna uh individuals or the
hostages or the captives if Israel
doesn't stop so we're going we're going
back a full cycle and uh I think worse
is to come how much pressure is building
on Egypt and Jordan particularly from
the US after they snub the meeting with
Biden must be a huge pressure I mean
Jordan in particular is a very in a very
difficult position economically it is
reliant on uh uh American Aid it
receives almost 1.5 billion dollars a
year uh and must find it very very
difficult to say no to United States but
at the same time it has its population
to worry about and without stability
internally no amount of Aid can help the
jordanians so I think the position that
was taken by King Abdullah his
government is the right one uh as far as
Egypt Egypt has sort of uh uh become
less and less dependent on American aid
over the last few years now they only
received just under a billion dollar uh
and um they they don't have the same
pressures but geographically it's Egypt
who's bordering Gaza and and uh again
100 million people who are angry upset
about what's going on will be very very
difficult to manage talking about people
angry and upset how do you think
audiences are going to particularly in
this part of the world be viewing the
statements that speech that we heard
from Joe Biden he on the one hand he
gave a very clear condemnation of the
Hamas attacks which killed so many
Israelis Israeli
civilians um he went into great detail
to share his unequivocal as he put it uh
condemnation but on the other hand we
didn't hear any kind of
language directed at Israel for
conducting attacks which international
human rights groups have also said I'm
quoting here the balam report of October
the 10th where they call a criminal
policy of Revenge in Gaza a policy of
preferring damage over precision and
they call it a war crime Human Rights
Watch in their statement of October 15th
saying the terrible deaths and injuries
and destruction of homes and schools an
indication that of the that the the laws
of war are not being followed by the
Israelis we're not seeing that kind
of evenhanded yes approach in that
speech from the US president how is that
going to resonate I mean I must say for
me it was a very odd speech it's very
theatrical and the references and the
way he delivered the speech is it's as
if he's the father of Israel talking to
him is a spoiled guilty child that uh
you shouldn't do this we should stick to
our rules our civilized actions Etc ET
he's even quoted from the tah and made I
think a couple of uh really bad
references that he will regret maybe
later on in terms of his political
career the reference to to uh the uh the
attack on the hospital as an a random
explosion this is ertic rocket
fire erant sorry erant rocket Fire by a
ter I think this is very similar to his
reference to the 40 babies being
beheaded and again that the the proof
will come out and he will be having to
backtrack on this and also this
quotation from Golden Mayer that we as
Jewish people have nowhere else to go
this kind of contradicts itself with
what's going on at the moment they're
flying in from all over the world to
fight on behalf of Israel they're flying
out from Israel on an Exodus everywhere
in the world everybody has a dual
nationality and so on so well the quote
he didn't mention for example is by the
Secretary General of Amnesty
International October 13th when Agnes
kalamar called for a halt of transfer of
arms that could be used to commit
unlawful attacks how do you think people
will will see the images of these
attacks in Gaza a lot of Civilian
suffering a lot of human rights groups
saying it's unlawful and it's associated
with American weapons and resupplying of
course when America supplied Saudi
Arabia in its war in Yemen there were a
lot of organizations and senators and
others calling for accountability based
on the fact that American weapons were
used in Saudi Air Raids on Yemen now
this is not just a suspicion he has
actually actioned the the weapons uh
they have supplied them in front of the
rest of the world we all know where
these uh ammunition the ammunition is
coming from and he's just made another
promise similar to the old days of
Biden with the previous war when just at
towards the end of uh of this conflict
he then is going to ask for increase of
the amount of money coming to Israel in
Weaponry it's already stands on $3.8
billion I suspected we pushed up beyond
that all right thank you so much Sultan
Barakat for analyzing it for us thank
you the eu's foreign policy Chief Joseph
borell has said cutting off water supply
in Gaza is
illegal Wars also have their rules they
are established in international law and
we have said it on several occasions
referring to other conflicts cutting off
water and basic supplies to a population
is not compatible with the law of War at
this moment there is no more water in
Gaza there are more than 3,000 dead and
a quarter of them are children we can
not hold all Gins responsible for the
criminal actions of Hamas